---
layout: post
title: "1. Axioms of set theory"
date: 2026-07-05 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - I. Foundations
  - 3. Axiomatic Set Theory
created_at: 2026-07-04 08:59:35 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-07-07 08:56:54 +0900
---

**Definition 3.1.1.** For convenience, we first introduce a syntactic sugar: If $\varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n)$ is a formula, we call 

$$ C = \lbrace  x : \varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n)\rbrace $$

a *class.* Members of $C$ are all those sets $x$ that satisfy $\varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n):$ 

$$ x\in C \leftrightarrow \varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n).$$

Every set can be represented as a class. If $S$ is a set, the class $\lbrace x : x\in S\rbrace$ denotes the set $S$ itself.<br>
&emsp; If $C = \lbrace x : \varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n) \rbrace$ and $D = \lbrace x : \psi (x,q_1, \dots, q_m)\rbrace$ then 

$$ \forall x \ [\varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n) \leftrightarrow \psi (x,q_1, \dots, q_m)] \rightarrow C = D.$$

$C$ is a *subclass* of $D$ if and only if for all $x,$ $x\in C$ implies $x\in D,$ denoted by $C\subseteq D.$ <br>
<br>

**Definition 3.1.2.** We define the following operations on classes: 

$$ \begin{align}
 C \cap  D &=\lbrace x : x\in  C \land x \in  D\rbrace,\\
 C \cup  D &=\lbrace x : x\in  C \lor x\in  D\rbrace,\\
 C -  D &=\lbrace x : x\in  C \land x\notin  D\rbrace,\\
\bigcup  C &=\lbrace x : \exists X \in  C \ (x\in X)\rbrace.
\end{align}
$$

<br>

**Axiom 3.1.3** (Extensionality).  

$$\forall X\, \forall Y \ [\forall x\ (x \in X \leftrightarrow x \in Y) \rightarrow X = Y]. \tag{\(\text{ZF1}\)}$$

<br>

**Axiom 3.1.4** (Pairing).  

$$\forall x\, \forall y\, \exists X\, \forall z \ [z \in X \leftrightarrow (z = x \vee z = y)]. \tag{\(\text{ZF2}\)}$$

By Extensionality, the set $X$ is unique. <br>
<br>

**Definition 3.1.5.** For two sets $a$ and $b,$ the *pair* $\lbrace a,b\rbrace$ is defined by 

$$ \lbrace a,b\rbrace = \lbrace x : x=a \lor x=b \rbrace.$$

We define an *ordered pair* to be the set $(a,b)$ such that

$$ (a,b) = \lbrace \lbrace a \rbrace , \lbrace a,b\rbrace \rbrace .$$ 

We further define ordered triples, quadruples, etc., as follows: 

$$
\begin{aligned}
(a,b,c) &= ((a,b),c), \\
(a,b,c,d) &= ((a,b,c),d), \\
&\ \ \vdots \\
(a_1,\dots,a_{n+1}) &= ((a_1,\dots,a_n),a_{n+1}).
\end{aligned}
$$


<br>

**Axiom 3.1.6** (Separation Schema). Let $\varphi (x,p)$ be a formula. 

$$\forall X\, \forall p \, \exists Y \,\forall x\ [x\in Y\leftrightarrow x\in X\land \varphi (x,p)]. \tag{\(\text{ZF3}\)}$$

This can be generalized: 

 $$\forall X\, \forall p_1 \dots  \forall p_n \,\exists Y \,\forall x\ [x\in Y\leftrightarrow x\in X\land \varphi (x,p_1,\dots, p_n)].$$

We can express this by using a class: Let $C = \lbrace x : \varphi (x,p_1, \dots, p_n) \rbrace,$ then 

$$ \forall X\, \exists Y \ (X\cap C = Y).$$

It follows that the empty class $\emptyset = \lbrace x : x\neq x\rbrace$ is a set—the *empty set.*<br>
<br>

**Definition 3.1.7.** By the Separation Axioms, the intersection and the difference of two sets are sets. So we define the set operations 

$$ X \cap Y = \lbrace x\in X : x \in Y\rbrace \quad \text{and} \quad X-Y = \lbrace x\in X : x\notin Y\rbrace.$$


If $A\cap B=\emptyset,$ two sets $A$ and $B$ are *disjoint.*<br>
&emsp; If $C$ is a nonempty class, 

$$ \bigcap C = \lbrace x : \forall X\  (X \in C \rightarrow x\in X)\rbrace$$

is a set.

<br>

**Axiom 3.1.8** (Union). 

$$\forall \mathcal X\, \exists X\, \forall x \ [x \in X \leftrightarrow \exists Y\ (Y \in \mathcal X \land x \in Y )]. \tag{\(\text{ZF4}\)}$$

Thus, for a set $\mathcal A$ there is a unique set 

$$ A = \lbrace x : \exists B\ (B\in \mathcal A \land x\in B)\rbrace = \bigcup \mathcal A,$$

the *union* of $\mathcal A.$

<br>
<br>

**Theorem 3.1.9.** Let $A,B,$ and $C$ be sets. Then following holds: 
1. $A\cap (B \cup C) = (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$
2. $A\cup (B \cap C) = (A\cup B) \cap (A \cup C).$

*Proof.*<br>
(1) Suppose that $x\in A\cap (B \cup C).$ Then $x\in A$ and $x\in (B\cup C).$ This is divided into two cases. $x\in A$ and $x\in B,$ the first case, and $x\in A$ and $x\in B,$ the second case. In the first case, $x\in (A\cap B)$ so that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ In the second case, $x\in (A\cap C)$ so that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ Thus, if $x\in A\cap (B \cup C),$ then $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$<br>
&emsp; Conversely, we suppose that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ In the same way, we can see that if $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C)$ then $x\in A\cap (B \cup C).$ <br>
&emsp; Therefore if follows that $A\cap (B \cup C)$ and $(A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C)$ are bound to consist of the same elements.<br><br>
(2) It is proven in the same way as above. <span class="qed">$\square$</span> 

<br>

**Theorem 3.1.10.** Let $A,B,$ and $C$ be sets. Then following holds: 

1. $A- (B \cup C) = (A- B) \cup (A - C).$
2. $A- (B \cap C) = (A- B) \cap (A - C).$

*Proof.* It is proven in the same way as in the Theorem 3.1.9.<br>
<br>

**Axiom 3.1.11** (Power Set).

$$ \forall X\, \exists \mathcal P\,\forall Y\ (Y\in \mathcal P \leftrightarrow Y\subseteq X). \tag{\(\text{ZF5}\)}$$

<br>

**Definition 3.1.12.** Let $A$ be a set. The *power set* of $A$ is the set $\mathcal P(A)$ defined by 

$$ \mathcal P(A) = \lbrace X : X\subseteq A\rbrace.$$

<br>

**Definition 3.1.13.** We use the abbreviation $\lbrace (x,y) : \varphi(x,y)\rbrace$ for $\lbrace z : \exists x\, \exists y\ (z=(x,y)\land \varphi(x,y))\rbrace.$ Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. We define the *product* of $A$ and $B$ to be the class such that 

$$ A\times B = \lbrace (x,y) : x\in A \land x\in B\rbrace.$$

If $(x,y)\in A\times B$ then there exist $x\in A$ and $y\in B$ so that 

$$ \lbrace x\rbrace , \lbrace x,y\rbrace \in \mathcal P(A\cup B).$$

Thus 

$$ (x,y)=\lbrace  \lbrace x\rbrace , \lbrace x,y\rbrace \rbrace  \subseteq \mathcal P(A\cup B).$$

Therefore $(x,y)\in \mathcal P (\mathcal P(A\cup B)).$ It follows that $A\times B\subseteq \mathcal P (\mathcal P(A\cup B)).$ Consequently the product $A\times B$ is a set.<br>
&emsp; We further define $A\times B\times C = (A\times B)\times C,$ and in general 

$$ A_1\times \cdots \times A_{n+1} = (A_1\times \cdots \times A_{n}) \times A_{n+1}.$$

We also let 

$$ A^n = \underbrace{A \times \cdots \times A}_{n\ \text{times}}. $$

## References
1. Thomas Jech, *Set Theory*, The Third Millennium Edition, Springer, ISBN 9783540440857
{:reference}
