---
layout: post
title: 1. Introduction
date: 2026-06-02 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - III. Linear Algebra
  - 1. Vector Spaces
created_at: 2026-06-02 11:01:58 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-06-17 18:59:27 +0900
---

**The definition of a vector.** We consider a physical quantity that includes data of direction and magnitude, and we extract the data to form an entity. In this case, we call the entity a *vector*. <br>
<br>

**The definition of a  sum.** We consider two vectors that represent two physical quantities. In this case, a vector that represents the combined effects of the original quantities is called the *sum* of the original vectors.<br>
<br>

**Parallelogram Law.** Experiments have shown that when representing a vector as an arrow, the sum of two vectors $x$ and $y$ that emanate from the same point $P$ is obtained by drawing a parallelogram having $x$ and $y$ as adjacent sides: The sum is the arrow beginning at $P$ whose length and direction are same as the diagonal of the parallelogram. The rule is called the *parallelogram law*.<br>
<br>

**Vector addition.** 위 규칙으로부터, 우리는 vector system에 algebraic structure가 있음을 알 수 있다. 이 때 두 벡터로부터 sum을 만들어내는 operation을 vector addition이라고 부른다. 
&emsp; Vector addition also can be described algebraically with the use of analytic geometry. We introduce a plane with the Cartesian coordinates system. Let $(a_1,a_2)$ denote the endpoint of $x$ and $(b_1,b_2)$ denote the endpoint of $y$. Then the end point of $x+y$ is $(a_1+b_1,a_2+b_2)$.<br>
<br>

**Scalar multiplication.** There is another natural operation that can be performed on vectors—*scalar multiplication.* If a vector $x$ is represented by an arrow, then for any nonzero real number $t$, the vector $tx$ is represented by an arrow in the same direction if $t>0$ and in the opposite direction if $t<0$. And, the length of $tx$ is $\vert t \vert$ times the length of $x$.<br>
<br>

**Parallel** Two nonzero vectors $x$ and $y$ are called *parallel* if $y=tx$ for some nonzero real number $t$.<br>
<br>

**Properties of vectors.** The algebraic descriptions of vector addition and scalar multiplication yield the following properties: 
1. For all vectors $x$ and $y$, $x+y=y+x$.
2. For all vectors $x,y,$ and $z, (x+y)+z=x+(y+z)$.
3. There exists a vector denoted $0$ such that $x+0=x$ for each vector $x$.
4. For each vector $x$, there exists a vector $y$ such that $x+y=0$.
5. For each vector $x$, $1x=x$.
6. For each pair of real numbers $a$ and $b$ and each vector $x$, $(ab)x=a(bx)$.
7. For each pair of real numbers $a$ and $b$ and each vector $x$, $(a+b)x=ax+bx$.
8. For each real number $a$ and each pair of vectors $x$ and $y$, $a(x+y)=ax+ay$.