---
layout: post
title: "1. Multivariable functions and limits"
date: 2026-07-11 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - II. Calculus
  - 6. Multivariable Functions
created_at: 2026-07-12 17:46:51 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-07-13 18:23:13 +0900
---

**Definition 6.1.1.** If $X_1,\ldots,X_n\subseteq \mathbb R$ and $D=X_1\times\cdots\times X_n,$ a function

$$f:D\longrightarrow \mathbb R.$$

is a *function of* $n$ *variables.*

<br>

**Definition 6.1.2.** Let $f:D\to \mathbb R$ be a function of two variables and let $k\in f(D).$ A *level curve* of $f$ is the curve with the equation $f(\mathbf x) = k.$ A collection of level curves is called a *contour map.*<br>
<br>

**Definition 6.1.3.** Let $f:D\to \mathbb R$ be a function of three variables and let $k\in f(D).$ A *level surface* of $f$ is the surface with the equation $f(\mathbf x) = k.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 6.1.4.** Let $f:D\to \mathbb R$ be a function of two variables, and let

$$
B^{\ast}_\delta(a)

=

\left\lbrace 

(x,y)\in\mathbb R^2:

0<\sqrt{(x-a_1)^2+(y-a_2)^2}<\delta

\right\rbrace.
$$

Then we define a limit of $f$ at $a$ as follows: 

$$

\lim_{(x,y)\to a} f(x,y) = L \iff 

\forall\varepsilon>0\

\exists\delta>0\

\left(

f\bigl(D\cap B^{\ast}_{\delta}(a)\bigr)

\subseteq

(L-\varepsilon,L+\varepsilon)

\right).
$$

The negation can be written as follows: 

$$

\forall L\in \mathbb R\

\exists\varepsilon>0\

\forall\delta>0\

\left(

f\bigl(D\cap B^{\ast}_{\delta}(a)\bigr)

\nsubseteq

(L-\varepsilon,L+\varepsilon)

\right).
$$

We also define the limit of $f$ restricted to $A$ at $a$ as follows:

$$  
\lim_{(x,y)\to a}(f|_A)(x,y)=L  
\iff  

\forall\varepsilon>0\

\exists\delta>0\

\left(

f\bigl(A\cap B^{\ast}_{\delta}(a)\bigr)

\subseteq

(L-\varepsilon,L+\varepsilon)

\right).
$$

<br>

**Theorem 6.1.5.** Let $f\to\mathbb R$ be a function of two variables and let $A\subseteq D.$ If

$$  
\lim_{(x,y)\to a}f(x,y)=L,  
$$

then

$$  
\lim_{(x,y)\to a}(f|_A)(x,y)=L.  
$$

<br>

## Exercises

**Exercise 1.** Show that there is no $L\in \mathbb R$ such that 

$$ 
\lim_{(x,y)\to (0,0)} \frac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2} = L.
$$

*Proof.* Let $f:D\to \mathbb R$ be the function such that 

$$\forall (x,y)\in D\ \left(f(x,y)=\frac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2}\right),$$

and let $\delta>0$ be arbitrary. We have 

$$
\left(\frac{\delta}{2},0\right)\in B_\delta^\ast(0,0),

\qquad

\left(0,\frac{\delta}{2}\right)\in B_\delta^\ast(0,0),
$$ 

and

$$
f\left(\frac{\delta}{2},0\right)=1,

\qquad

f\left(0,\frac{\delta}{2}\right)=-1.
$$ 

Thus, for all $\delta > 0,$

$$
\lbrace -1,1\rbrace 

\subseteq

f\bigl(B_\delta^\ast(0,0)\bigr).
$$

But, for any $L\in \mathbb R,$ we have

$$ 
\lbrace -1,1\rbrace \nsubseteq

(L-1,L+1),
$$

so that 
$$ 
f\bigl(B_\delta^\ast(0,0)\bigr) \nsubseteq

(L-1,L+1).
$$

Therefore, by Definition 6.1.4, there is no $L\in\mathbb R$ such that

$$  
\lim_{(x,y)\to(0,0)}  
\frac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2}=L.  \tag*{\(\square\)} 
$$

<br>


## References
1. Stewart, J., Clegg, D. K., & Watson, S. (2021). *Calculus* (9th ed.). Cengage Learning.
{:reference}
