---
layout: post
title: "1. Sets"
date: 2026-06-24 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - III. Topology
  - 1. A Set as a Foundational Object
created_at: 2026-06-25 12:36:39 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-06-28 13:27:24 +0900
---

**Remark 1.1.1.** We take a set to be a foundational object and we shall redefine some mathematical objects based on sets. This is because, although we will be working on object-level, we should observe $\text{ZFC}$ to avoid fatal logical errors, and also because the objects redefined in such way are indeed equivalent to the ordinary objects defined before.<br>
<br>

**Notation 1.1.2.** If an object $a$ belongs to set $A,$ we express this by writing  $a\in A.$ If $a$ does not belong to $A,$ we express this by writing $a\notin A.$ If two sets $A$ and $B$ consist of precisely the same elements, we denotes this fact as $A = B.$ If not, then we write $A\neq B.$ <br>
&emsp; If $A$ is a subset of $B,$ that is, if every element of $A$ is also an element of $B,$ we write $A\subseteq B.$ We also write $B\supseteq A,$ which is read "$B$ contains $A.$" If $A\subseteq B$ and $A\neq B,$ we write $A\subsetneq B,$ which is read "$A$ is a proper subset of $B.$"<br>
&emsp; If a set $A$ consists of the elements $a,b,$ and $c,$ we write $A=\lbrace a,b,c\rbrace.$ If a set $A$ consists of all elements of a set $B$ having some property $\varphi(x),$ we write $A=\lbrace x\in B : \varphi(x) \rbrace.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.3.** Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. We define the *union* of $A$ and $B$ as $\lbrace x : x\in A \lor x\in B\rbrace,$  denoted by $A\cup B.$ We also define the *intersection* of $A$ and $B$ as $\lbrace x : x\in A \land x\in B\rbrace,$ denoted by $A\cap B.$ The set consisting of no elements is called the *empty set,* denoted by $\varnothing.$ If $A\cap B=\varnothing,$ we say "$A$ and $B$ are *disjoint.*"<br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.1.4.** Let $A,B,$ and $C$ be sets. Then following holds: 
1. $A\cap (B \cup C) = (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$
2. $A\cup (B \cap C) = (A\cup B) \cap (A \cup C).$

*Proof.*<br>
(1) Suppose that $x\in A\cap (B \cup C).$ Then $x\in A$ and $x\in (B\cup C).$ This is divided into two cases. $x\in A$ and $x\in B,$ the first case, and $x\in A$ and $x\in B,$ the second case. In the first case, $x\in (A\cap B)$ so that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ In the second case, $x\in (A\cap C)$ so that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ Thus, if $x\in A\cap (B \cup C),$ then $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$<br>
&emsp; Conversely, we suppose that $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C).$ In the same way, we can see that if $x\in (A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C)$ then $x\in A\cap (B \cup C).$ <br>
&emsp; Therefore if follows that $A\cap (B \cup C)$ and $(A\cap B) \cup (A \cap C)$ are bound to consist of the same elements.<br><br>
(2) It is proven in the same way as above. <span class="qed">$\square$</span> 

<br>

**Definition 1.1.5** Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The *relative complement* of $B$ in $A$ is the set $A-B$ defined by the equation $A-B=\lbrace x\in A:x\notin B\rbrace.$ <br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.1.6.** Let $A,B,$ and $C$ be sets. Then following holds: 

1. $A- (B \cup C) = (A- B) \cup (A - C).$
2. $A- (B \cap C) = (A- B) \cap (A - C).$

*Proof.* It is proven in the same way as in the Theorem 1.1.4.<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.7.** The *power set* of a set $A$ is the collection $\mathcal P$ defined by the equation $\mathcal P=\lbrace x : x\subseteq A  \rbrace.$ We also denote the set as $\mathcal P(A).$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.8.** We consider the union and intersection of arbitrary many sets. We first form the collection $\mathcal C$ of sets. Then we define the union of $\mathcal C$ as $\lbrace x : \exists y \in \mathcal C \ ( x\in y) \rbrace,$ denoted by $\bigcup \mathcal C.$ Also we define the intersection of $\mathcal C$ as $\lbrace x : \forall y \in \mathcal C \ (x\in y) \rbrace,$ denoted by $\bigcap \mathcal C.$<br>
<br>

**Remark 1.1.9.** From the definitions of a union and intersection of two sets and the relative complements of a set, we can define the union operation, intersection operation, and difference operation. <br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.10.** We now consider a set of ordered pairs, which are also called 2-tuples. Given sets $A$ and $B,$ we define their *Cartesian product* $A\times B$ to be the set of all ordered pairs $(a,b)$ where $a\in A$ and $b\in B.$ That is, $A\times B = \lbrace (a,b) : a\in A \land b \in B \rbrace.$<br>
<br>


## References
- James Munkres, *Topology*, Second Edition, Pearson, ISBN 9781292023625.