---
layout: post
title: "2. Functions"
date: 2026-06-24 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - III. Topology
  - 1. A Set as a Foundational Object
created_at: 2026-06-24 17:07:53 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-06-25 11:38:37 +0900
---

**Definition 1.2.1.** Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. A *rule of assignment* is a subset $R$ of the Cartesian product $A\times B$ such that 

$$ (a,b)\in R \land (a,b')\in R  \Longrightarrow b=b'.$$

The *domain* of $R$ is the set $\lbrace a : \exists b \in B\  [(a,b)\in R]\rbrace,$ and the *image* of $R$ is the set $\lbrace b : \exists a \in A \ [(a,b)\in R]\rbrace.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.2.** A *function* $f$ is a rule of assignment $R,$ together with a set $B$ that contains the image of $R.$ The domain $A$ of $R$ is also called the *domain* of $f,$ and the image of $R$ is also called the *image* of $f;$ the set $B$ is called the *codomain* of $f.$ In this case, we write 

$$f: A\longrightarrow B,$$

which is read "$f$ is a function from $A$ to $B,$" or "$f$ maps $A$ into $B.$" <br>
&emsp; If $f: A\rightarrow B$ and $a\in A,$ we denote the unique element of $B$ to which $R$ assigns $a$ as $f(a).$ It is called the *value* of $f$ at $a.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.3.** Let $f:A\to B$ and $A_0\subset A$ be given. We define the *restriction* of $f$ to $A_0$ to be the function with codomain $B$ whose rule is $\lbrace (a,f(a)) : a\in A_0 \rbrace.$ It is denoted by $f|_{A_0}.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.4.** Let $f:A\to B$ and $g:B\to C$ be given. The *composite* of $f$ and $g$ is the function $g \circ f : A\to C$ such that $(g\circ f)(a) = g(f(a)).$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.5.** A function $f:A\to B$ is said to be *injective* if 

$$ \forall a,a'\in A\ [f(a)=f(a') \Rightarrow a=a'],$$ 

and said to be *surjective* if 

$$ \forall b\in B\, \exists a\in A\ [b=f(a)].$$

If $f$ is both injective and surjective then $f$ is said to be *bijective.*<br>
&emsp; Injectivity of $f$ only depends on the rule of $f,$ while surjectivity depends on both the rule of $f$ and the codomain of $f,$ The composite of two injective functions is injective, and the composite of two surjective functions is surjective. It follows that the composite of two bijective functions is bijective.<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.6.** Let a function $f:A\to B$ be bijective. Then the *inverse* of $f$ is the function $f^{-1}:B\to A$ such that $f^{-1}(b)=a$ where $f(a)=b.$<br>
<br>

**Lemma 1.2.7.** Let $f:A\to B.$ If there are functions $g:B\to A$ and $h:B\to A$ such that $g(f(a))=a$ for all $a\in A$ and $f(h(b))=b$ for all $b\in B,$ then $f$ is bijective and $g=h=f^{-1}.$<br>
*Proof.* Let $a,a'\in A.$ We have $(f(a),a)\in g$ and $(f(a'),a')\in g.$ Thus, if $f(a)=f(a')$ then $a=a',$ by Definition 1.2.1. Therefore $f$ is injective. Let $b\in B.$ We have $(h(b),b)\in f.$ Thus there exists $a\in A$ such that $(a,b)\in f.$ Therefore $f$ is surjective. Since $f$ is both injective and surjective, $f$ is bijective.<br>
&emsp; Let $b\in B.$ Then there exists $a$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $g(b)=g(f(a))=a,$ $g$ is the inverse of $f.$ Since $f(a)=b$ and $f(h(b))=b,$ by the definition of injectivity, $a=h(b).$ Thus $h$ is also the inverse of $f.$ <span class="qed">$\square$</span>
