---
layout: post
title: "2. Functions"
date: 2026-06-24 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - III. Topology
  - 1. Set Theory
created_at: 2026-06-25 12:36:39 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-07-02 18:29:31 +0900
---

**Definition 1.2.1.** Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. A *rule of assignment* $R$ is a subset of the Cartesian product $A\times B$ such that 

$$ (a,b)\in R \land (a,b')\in R  \Longrightarrow b=b'.$$

The *domain* of $R$ is the set $\lbrace a : \exists b \in B\  [(a,b)\in R]\rbrace,$ and the *image* of $R$ is the set $\lbrace b : \exists a \in A \ [(a,b)\in R]\rbrace.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.2.** A rule of assignment $R$ whose domain is $A,$ together with a set $B$ that contains the image of $R$ is a *function* from $A$ to $B.$ When we denote the function as $f,$ we write 

$$f: A\longrightarrow B,$$

The domain $A$ of $R$ is the *domain* of $f,$ and the image of $R$ is the *image* of $f;$ the set $B$ is the *codomain* of $f.$ If $a\in A,$ the *value* of $f$ at $a$ is the unique element of $B$ to which $R$ assigns $a.$ <br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.3.** Let $f:A\to B$ and $A_0\subseteq A$ be given. The *restriction* of $f$ to $A_0$ is the function with codomain $B$ whose rule is $\lbrace (a,f(a)) : a\in A_0 \rbrace.$ It is denoted by $f|_{A_0}.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.4.** Let $f:A\to B$ and $g:B\to C$ be given. The *composite* of $f$ and $g$ is the function $g \circ f : A\to C$ such that $(g\circ f)(a) = g(f(a)).$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.5.** A function $f:A\to B$ is *injective* if 

$$ \forall a,a'\in A\ [f(a)=f(a') \Rightarrow a=a'],$$ 

and *surjective* if 

$$ \forall b\in B\, \exists a\in A\ [b=f(a)].$$

If $f$ is both injective and surjective then $f$ is said to be *bijective.*<br>
&emsp; Injectivity of $f$ only depends on the rule of $f,$ while surjectivity depends on both the rule of $f$ and the codomain of $f,$ The composite of two injective functions is injective, and the composite of two surjective functions is surjective. It follows that the composite of two bijective functions is bijective.<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.6.** Let a function $f:A\to B$ be bijective. Then the *inverse* of $f$ is the function $f^{-1}:B\to A$ such that $f^{-1}(b)=a$ where $f(a)=b.$<br>
<br>

**Lemma 1.2.7.** Let $f:A\to B.$ If there are functions $g:B\to A$ and $h:B\to A$ such that $g(f(a))=a$ for all $a\in A$ and $f(h(b))=b$ for all $b\in B,$ then $f$ is bijective and $g=h=f^{-1}.$<br><br>
*Proof.* Let $a,a'\in A.$ We have $(f(a),a)\in g$ and $(f(a'),a')\in g.$ Thus, if $f(a)=f(a')$ then $a=a',$ by Definition 1.2.1. Therefore $f$ is injective. Let $b\in B.$ We have $(h(b),b)\in f.$ Thus there exists $a\in A$ such that $(a,b)\in f.$ Therefore $f$ is surjective. Since $f$ is both injective and surjective, $f$ is bijective.<br>
&emsp; Let $b\in B.$ Then there exists $a$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $g(b)=g(f(a))=a,$ $g$ is the inverse of $f.$ Since $f(a)=b$ and $f(h(b))=b,$ by the definition of injectivity, $a=h(b).$ Thus $h$ is also the inverse of $f.$ <span class="qed">$\square$</span><br>
<br>

**Definition 1.2.8.** Let $f:A\to B$ and $A_0\subseteq A.$ The *image* of $A_0$ under $f$ is the set $f(A_0)$ defined by 

$$ f(A_0)=\lbrace b \in B : \exists a\in A_0 \ [b=f(a)] \rbrace.$$

If $B_0\subseteq B,$ the *preimage* of $B_0$ under $f$ is the set $f^{-1}(B_0)$ defined by 

$$ f^{-1}(B_0) = \lbrace a \in A : f(a)\in B_0 \rbrace .$$

We can also define set-level operations of the image operation and the preimage operation from the above.<br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.2.9.** Let $f:A\to B$ and let $A_i\subseteq A$ for $i=0$ and $i=1.$ The image operation $f$ preserves only the inclusion and  union operation. That is, the followings hold.
1. $A_0\subseteq A_1 \Rightarrow f(A_0)\subseteq f(A_1).$
2. $f(A_0\cup A_1)=f(A_0)\cup f(A_1).$
3. $f(A_0\cap A_1) \subseteq f(A_0)\cap f(A_1),$ the equality holds if $f$ is injective.
4. $f(A_0) - f(A_1)\subseteq f(A_0-A_1),$ the equality holds if $f$ is injective.

*Proof.* <br>
(1) If $b\in f(A_0),$ there exists $a\in A_0$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $A_0\subseteq A_1,$ it follows that $a\in A_1.$ Thus $b=f(a)\in f(A_1).$ Therefore $f(A_0)\subseteq f(A_1).$<br><br>
(2) Suppose that $b\in f(A_0\cup A_1).$ Then there exists $a\in A_0\cup A_1$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Without loss of generality, let $a\in A_0.$ It follows that $b=f(a)\in f(A_0),$ so that $b\in f(A_0)\cup f(A_1).$ Thus $f(A_0\cup A_1)\subseteq f(A_0)\cup f(A_1).$<br> &emsp; Conversely, we suppose that $b\in f(A_0)\cup f(A_1).$ Without loss of generality, let $b\in f(A_0).$ Then there exists $a\in A_0$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $a\in A_0\cup A_1,$ it follows that $b=f(a)\in A_0\cup A_1.$ Thus $f(A_0)\cup f(A_1)\subseteq f(A_0\cup A_1).$ Consequently, $f(A_0\cup A_1)=f(A_0)\cup f(A_1).$<br><br>
(3) Suppose that $b\in f(A_0\cap A_1).$ Then there exists $a\in A_0\cap A_1$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $a\in A_0$ and $a\in A_1,$ it follows that $f(a)\in f(A_0)$ and $f(a)\in F(A_1).$ Thus $b=f(a)\in f(A_0)\cap f(A_1),$ and, consequently, $f(A_0\cap A_1) \subseteq f(A_0)\cap f(A_1).$<br>
&emsp; We now suppose that $f$ is injective. If $b\in f(A_0)\cap f(A_1),$ then there exists exactly one $a\in A$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Since $a\in A_0$ and $a\in A_1,$ it follows that $a\in A_0\cap A_1.$ Therefore $f(a)\in f(A_0\cap A_1),$ and, thus, $f(A_0)\cap f(A_1)\subseteq f(A_0\cap A_1).$ Given that $f(A_0\cap A_1) \subseteq f(A_0)\cap f(A_1),$ we finally have $f(A_0\cap A_1) = f(A_0)\cap f(A_1).$<br><br>
(4) Suppose that $b\in f(A_0) - f(A_1).$ Then $b\in f(A_0)$ and $b\notin f(A_1).$ It follows that there exists $a\in A_0$ such that $f(a)=b,$ and $a\notin A_1.$ Thus $a\in A_0-A_1.$ Therefore $b=f(a)\in f(A_0-A_1),$ and, consequently, $f(A_0) - f(A_1)\subseteq f(A_0-A_1).$<br>
&emsp; We now suppose that $f$ is injective and $b\in f(A_0-A_1).$ Then there exists exactly one $a\in A$ such that $f(a)=b.$ That is, $a\in A_0-A_1.$ It follows that $a\in A_0$ and $a\notin A_1.$ Thus $b\in f(A_0)$ and $b\notin f(A_1).$ Therefore $b\in f(A_0) - f(A_1),$ and, thus, $f(A_0-A_1)\subseteq f(A_0) - f(A_1).$ Given that $f(A_0) - f(A_1)\subseteq f(A_0-A_1),$ we finally have $f(A_0) - f(A_1)=f(A_0 - A_1).$<span class="qed">$\square$</span> 
    

<br>

**Theorem 1.2.10.** Let $f:A\to B$ and let $B_i\subseteq B$ for $i=0$ and $i=1.$ The preimage operation $f^{-1}$ preserves the operations of union, intersection, and difference. It also preserves the inclusion. That is, the followings hold.
1. $B_0\subseteq B_1 \Rightarrow f^{-1}(B_0)\subseteq f^{-1}(B_1).$
2. $f^{-1}(B_0\cup B_1)=f^{-1}(B_0)\cup f^{-1}(B_1).$
3. $f^{-1}(B_0\cap B_1) = f^{-1}(B_0)\cap f^{-1}(B_1).$
4. $f^{-1}(B_0) - f(B_1) = f^{-1}(B_0-B_1).$

*Proof.* It is not quite different from in proving Theorem 1.2.9 to prove this.<br>
<br>


**Theorem 1.2.10.** Let $f:A\to B, A_0\subseteq A,$ and $B_0\subseteq B.$ Then 

$$ A_0\subseteq f^{-1}(f(A_0))\quad \text{and} \quad f(f^{-1}(B_0))\subseteq B_0.$$

The first inclusion is an equality if $f$ is injective, and the second is an equality if $f$ is surjective.<br><br>
*Proof.* If $a\in A_0$ then $f(a)\in f(A_0).$ Thus all the elements of $A$ whose image under $f$ is the same as $f(a)$ are elements of $f^{-1}(f(A_0)),$ by Definition 1.2.8. Thus  $a\in f^{-1}(f(A_0)).$ Consequently, 
   
   $$A_0\subseteq f^{-1}(f(A_0)). \tag{\(\ast\)}$$ 
   
We now suppose that $f$ is injective. If $a\in f^{-1}(f(A_0))$ then $f(a)\in f(A_0).$ That is, there exists $a'\in A_0$ such that $f(a')\in A_0$ such that $f(a')=f(a).$ Since $f$ is injective, $a'=a,$ thus $a\in A_0.$ Therefore,  $f^{-1}(f(A_0)) \subseteq A_0.$ Given $(\ast),$ it follows that $f^{-1}(f(A_0)) = A_0.$ <br><br>
If $b\in f(f^{-1}(B_0))$ then there exists $a\in f^{-1}(B_0)$ such that $f(a)=b.$ Thus $f(a)\in B_0.$ Since $f(a)=b,b\in B_0.$ Consequently, 
   
   $$f(f^{-1}(B_0))\subseteq B_0. \tag{\(\ast \ast \)}$$

&emsp; We now suppose that $f$ is surjective. Thus there exists $a\in A$ such that $f(a)=b$ if $b\in B_0.$ By Definition 1.2.8, $a\in f^{-1}(B_0),$ thus $f(a)\in f(f^{-1}(B_0)).$ Therefore $B_0 \subseteq  f(f^{-1}(B_0)).$ Given $(\ast \ast ),$ it follows that $f(f^{-1}(B_0))= B_0.$ <span class="qed">$\square$</span><br>
<br>


## References
- James Munkres, *Topology*, Second Edition, Pearson, ISBN 9781292023625.