---
layout: post
title: "3. The complex field"
date: 2026-07-19 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - 3. Introduction to Real Analysis
  - 1. Number Systems
created_at: 2026-07-19 15:51:28 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-07-19 18:28:05 +0900
---

**Definition 1.3.1.** A *complex number* is an ordered pair $(x,y)$ of real numbers. The set $\mathbb C$ of all complex numbers is, therefore, $\mathbb R^2.$<br>
&emsp; We define the distinguished elements of $\mathbb C$ by

$$  
0_{\mathbb C}=(0,0)  
\qquad\text{and}\qquad  
1_{\mathbb C}=(1,0).  
$$

For all $(x,y),(u,v)\in\mathbb C$, define

$$  
(x,y)+(u,v)=(x+u,y+v),  
$$

$$  
-(x,y)=(-x,-y),  
$$

and

$$  
(x,y)\cdot(u,v)=(xu-yv,xv+yu).  
$$

We write

$$  \mathcal C = 
\left(  
\mathbb C,  
0_{\mathbb C},  
1_{\mathbb C},  
+,  
-,  
\cdot  
\right)  
$$

for the resulting $\mathcal L_{\mathrm{field}}$-structure.<br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.3.2.** The structure $\mathcal C$ is a field. Equivalently,

$$  
\mathcal C\vDash T_{\mathrm{field}}.  
$$

*Proof.* 

<br>

**Theorem 1.3.3.** We define the map $\iota:\mathbb R\to\mathbb C$ by

$$  
\iota(x)=(x,0).  
$$

Then $\iota$ is an $\mathcal L_{\mathrm{field}}$-embedding of the real field into the complex field.<br><br>

*Proof.* The map $\iota$ is injective, since $\iota(x)=\iota(y)$ implies $(x,0)=(y,0),$ and hence $x=y$. Moreover,

$$  
\iota(0)=(0,0)=0_{\mathbb C},  
\qquad  
\iota(1)=(1,0)=1_{\mathbb C},  
$$

and, for all $x,y\in\mathbb R$,

$$  
\iota(x+y)=(x+y,0)=(x,0)+(y,0)=\iota(x)+\iota(y),  
$$

$$  
\iota(-x)=(-x,0)=-\iota(x),  
$$

and

$$  
\iota(xy)=(xy,0)=(x,0)(y,0)=\iota(x)\iota(y).  
$$

Therefore, $\iota$ preserves the interpretations of all symbols of $\mathcal L_{\mathrm{field}}$. <span class="qed">$\square$</span><br>
<br>

**Remark 1.3.4.** The image

$$  \iota\left[\mathbb R\right] = 
\lbrace (x,0)\in\mathbb C : x\in\mathbb R \rbrace 
$$

therefore forms a subfield of $\mathcal C$ isomorphic to $\mathcal R$. We henceforth identify each $x\in\mathbb R$ with its image $(x,0)\in\mathbb C$. Under this identification,

$$  
\mathbb R\subseteq\mathbb C.  
$$

<br>

**Definition 1.3.5.** The *imaginary unit* is the complex number

$$  
i=(0,1).  
$$

It satisfies

$$  
i^2=(0,1)(0,1)=(-1,0)=-1.  
$$

<br>

**Theorem 1.3.6.** For every $z\in\mathbb C$, there exist unique $x,y\in\mathbb R$ such that

$$  
z=x+yi.  
$$

*Proof.* Let $z=(x,y)\in\mathbb C$. Under the canonical identification of $\mathbb R$ with $\iota[\mathbb R]$,

$$  
\begin{aligned}  
x+yi  
&=  
(x,0)+(y,0)(0,1)\\  
&=  
(x,0)+(0,y)\\  
&=  
(x,y)\\  
&=  
z.  
\end{aligned}  
$$

For uniqueness, suppose that $x+yi=u+vi$ for some $x,y,u,v\in\mathbb R$. In terms of ordered pairs, this equality is $(x,y)=(u,v).$ Consequently, $x=u$ and $y=v$. <span class="qed">$\square$</span><br>
<br>

**Definition 1.3.7.** If $z=x+yi,$ where $x,y\in\mathbb R$, then $x$ is called the *real part* of $z$, and $y$ is called the *imaginary part* of $z$. We write

$$  
\operatorname{Re}(z)=x  
\qquad\text{and}\qquad  
\operatorname{Im}(z)=y.  
$$

The complex number $\bar z = x - yi$ is called the *conjugate* of $z.$<br>
<br>


## References
1. Rudin, W. (1976). *Principles of mathematical analysis* (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill Education.
{:reference}