---
layout: post
title: "1. Riemann sums and definite integrals"
date: 2026-06-22 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - I. Calculus
  - 3. Integrals and Integration
created_at: 2026-06-22 15:16:39 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-06-26 13:14:52 +0900
---

**Definition 3.1.1.** A *sequence* of real numbers is a function $a: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}.$ For each $n \in \mathbb{N}$, the value $a(n)$ is usually denoted by $a_n$, and it is called the $n$-*th term* of the sequence. The sequence itself is usually written as

$$(a_n)_{n=1}^{\infty}$$

or simply as

$$a_1, a_2, a_3, \dots .$$

Thus, a sequence is an ordered list of real numbers indexed by the positive integers.<br>
<br>

**Definition 3.1.2.** Let $(a_n)_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence of real numbers, and let $m, n \in \mathbb{N}$ with $m \leq n$. The *summation* of the terms $a_m, a_{m+1}, \dots, a_n$ is denoted by

$$\sum_{i=m}^{n} a_i,$$

and is defined by

$$\sum_{i=m}^{n} a_i = a_m + a_{m+1} + \dots + a_n.$$

<br>

**Theorem 3.1.3.** Let $(a_n)_{n=1}^{\infty}$ and $(b_n)_{n=1}^{\infty}$ be a sequence of real numbers. Then the following holds: 
1. $$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n ca_i=c\sum\limits_{i=1}^n a_i.$$
2. $$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n (a_i+b_i)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^n a_i + \sum\limits_{i=1}^n b_i.$$
3. $$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n (a_i-b_i)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^n a_i - \sum\limits_{i=1}^n b_i.$$

<br>

**Definition 3.1.4.** Let $f$ be a function defined for $a\leq x \leq b.$ We divide the interval $[a,b]$ into $n$ subintervals of equal width $\Delta x=(b-a)/n,$ and let $x_0 (=a), x_1,\dots, x_n (=b)$ be the endpoints of these subintervals. We let $x_1^{\ast}, \dots, x_n^{\ast}$ be any *sample points* in these subintervals, that is, $x_i^{\ast}$ lies in the $i$th subinterval $[x_{i-1},x_i].$ Then the *Rimann sum* of $f$ from $a$ to $b$ is 

$$ \sum_{i=1}^n{f(x_i^{\ast})\Delta x}=f(x_1^{\ast})\Delta x +f(x_2^{\ast})\Delta x+ \cdots + f(x_n^{\ast})\Delta x.$$

&emsp; We now consider the limit of the Rimann sum. If 

$$ \lim_{n\to \infty} \sum_{i=1}^n f(x_i^{\ast})\Delta x=L$$

holds where $L\in \mathbb R,$ we define the *definite integral* of $f$ from $a$ to $b$ to be $L,$ denoted by 

$$ \int_a^b f(x)\, dx.$$

In this case, we say that $f$ is *integrable* on $[a,b].$ For reference, in this notation, $f$ is called the *integrand,* and $a$ and $b$ are called the *limits of integration*; $a$ is the *lower limit*, and $b$ is the *upper limit.*<br>
<br>

**Theorem 3.1.5.** If a function $f$ is continuous on $[a,b],$ then $f$ is integrable on $[a,b].$<br>
<br>

**Theorem 3.1.6.** If a function $f$ is integrable on $[a,b],$ then 

$$ \int_a^b f(x)\, dx = \lim_{n\to \infty} \sum_{i=1}^n f\!\left(a+\frac{b-a}{n}i\right)\frac{b-a}{n}. $$

<br>

**Theorem 3.1.7.** Let $f:[a,b]\to\mathbb{R}$ be integrable function and let $c\in \mathbb R.$ Then the followings hold.
1. $$\int_a^b f(x)\, dx = - \int_b^a f(x)\, dx.$$
2. $$\int_a^a f(x)\, dx = 0.$$
3. $$
   \int_a^b (c f)(x)\,dx
   =
   c\int_a^b f(x)\,dx.
   $$

4. $$
   \int_a^b f(x)\,dx
   =
   \int_a^c f(x)\,dx+\int_c^b f(x)\,dx.
   $$

*Proof.* <br>
(1) Since 

$$\int_a^b f(x)\, dx + \int_b^a f(x)\, dx = \lim_{n\to \infty} \sum\limits_{i=1}^n f(x_i)\Delta x + \lim_{n\to \infty} \sum\limits_{i=1}^n f(x_i)(-\Delta x) = 0$$ 
   
where $\Delta x = (b-a)/n,$ thus 
   
$$\int_a^b f(x)\, dx = - \int_b^a f(x)\, dx.$$

(2) Since $\Delta x = 0,$ 
   
$$\ \int_a^a f(x)\, dx = \lim_{n\to \infty} \sum\limits_{i=1}^n f(x_i)\Delta x = 0. \tag*{\(\square\)} $$

<br>

**Theorem 3.1.8.** Let $f,g:[a,b]\to\mathbb{R}$ be integrable functions. If $f(x)\leq g(x)$ for $x\in[a,b],$ then

   $$
   \int_a^b f(x)\,dx
   \leq
   \int_a^b g(x)\,dx.
   $$

<br>

**Theorem 3.1.9.** Let $f:[a,b]\to\mathbb{R}$ be integrable function. If $m\leq f(x)\leq M$ for $x\in [a,b],$ then 

$$ m(b-a)\leq \int_a^bf(x)\,dx\leq M(b-a). $$

*Proof.* When we examine the Riemann sum, we can see that it has to do with the arithmetic mean of function values:

$$ 
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i=1}^n{f(x_i)\Delta x}
&=\sum_{i=1}^n{f(x_i)\frac{b-a}{n}}\\
&=(b-a)\frac{\sum_{i=1}^nf(x_i)}{n}.
\end{aligned}
$$

By Theorem 1.1.7, 

$$ m\leq \min{\lbrace f(x) : x=x_i\rbrace} \leq \frac{\sum_{i=1}^nf(x_i)}{n} \leq \max{\lbrace f(x) : x=x_i\rbrace} \leq M.$$

Thus, we get the range of the Riemann sum:

$$ m(b-a) \leq \sum_{i=1}^n{f(x_i)\Delta x} \leq M(b-a).$$

Finally, from the squeeze theorem, we have 

$$ m(b-a)\leq \int_a^bf(x)\,dx\leq M(b-a). \tag*{\(\square\)} $$

<br>

## References
- James Stewart, Daniel Clegg, and Saleem Watson, *Calculus*, Ninth Edition, Cengage, ISBN 9781337624183.