---
layout: post
title: "1. Rates of change and derivatives"
date: 2026-06-05 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - II. Calculus
  - 2. Derivatives
created_at: 2026-06-05 17:53:38 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-06-09 12:17:54 +0900
---

**Definition 2.1.1.** Suppose $y$ is a quantity that depends on another quantity $x$. The difference quotient 

$$ \frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x}=\frac{f(x_2)-f(x_1)}{x_2-x_1} $$

is called the *average rate of change* of $y$ with respect to $x$ over the interval $[x_1,x_2]$. Alternatively, we can also consider the average rate of change based on a single point $(a,f(a))$ as follows: 

$$ \frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}. $$

From this, we can define the *instantaneous rate of change* of $y$ with respect to $x$ at $(a,f(a))$ as follows: 

$$ \left.\frac{dy}{dx}\right\vert_{x=a}=\lim_{x \to a} \frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}.$$ 

<br>

**Definition 2.1.2.** Let $f$ be a real-valued function. If 

$$\lim_{x \to a} \frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}=L$$

holds, we define the *derivative* of $f$ at $x=a$ to be $L$, denoted by $f'(a)$. In this case, $f$ is said to be *differentiable* at $x=a$, which means when the input change is sufficiently small, the rate of change is a constant. More generally, if $I$ is an open interval and $f$ is differentiable at every point of $I$, then $f$ is said to be differentiable on $I$.<br>
<br>

**Remark 2.1.3.** Let $f$ be a function. When we draw the graph of $f$ on the Cartesian coordinate plane, the slope of the tangent line to $f$ at $x=a$ is equal to $f'(a)$.<br>
<br>

**Example 2.1.4.** Let $f:\mathbb R \to \mathbb R$ be the function such that $f(x)=\vert x \vert$. Where is $f$ differentiable?<br>
**Solution.** 어떤 $a$에서 "$L$ is a real number such that

$$\lim_{h\to 0}\frac{\vert a+h\vert -\vert a\vert}{h}=L$$

가 참"인지를 묻는 것이다. definition of absolute value로부터 조건별로 정의되어 있음을 알 수 있다. 따라서 경우를 나누는 수밖에 없겠다. 다만, 모든 경우를 볼 필요는 없다. $h\ne 0$가 충분히 $0$에 가깝다고 가정하고 $\vert a+h \vert$를 보자. $a>0$일 때에는 $a+h>0$임을 알 수 있다. 그러면 대칭적으로 $a<0\Rightarrow a+h< 0$일 것이다. 그리고 $a=0$이라면 $h$의 부호에 따라 결정된다. 따라서 전체 값은 이렇게 정리된다: 

$$  \frac{\vert a+h\vert -\vert a\vert}{h}= \begin{cases}
1 & \text{if }a > 0, \text{ or } a=0 \text{ and } h>0,\\
-1 & \text{if }a < 0, \text{ or } a=0 \text{ and } h<0.
\end{cases} $$

Definition 2.1.2에 의하여 $a\ne 0$일 때만이 the case이다.<br>
<br>

**Theorem 2.1.5.** If $f$ is differentiable at $x=a$, then $f$ is continuous at $x=a$.<br>
**Proof.** Since $f$ is differentiable at $x=a$, 

$$ \lim_{x \to a} \frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}=L.$$

Also, $\lim_{x\to a}{[x-a]}=0$. Therefore, by the product law for limits,

$$
\lim_{x \to a}{\left[\frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}\times(x-a)\right]}=L\times 0=0.
$$

By the way, from the basic fact that 

$$

\text{output change}= \text{average rate of change}\times \text{input change},

$$

we have

$$ f(x)-f(a)=\frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}\times (x-a) $$

when $x\ne a$. By Theorem 1.3.11, it follows that 

$$
\lim_{x\to a}{[f(x)-f(a)]}=0.
$$

And, we have 

$$
\lim_{x\to a}{[f(a)+(f(x)-f(a))]}=f(a).
$$

Finally, from the basic fact that 

$$ \text{output}= \text{reference output} + \text{output change}, $$

we have 

$$ f(x) = f(a) + (f(x)-f(a)). $$

Thus, by Theorem 1.3.11,

$$\lim_{x\to a}f(x)=f(a).$$

Therefore, $f$ is continuous at $x=a$. Q.E.D.<br>
<br>

**Definition 2.1.6.** A function $f':D\to \mathbb R$ is the *derivative* of $f$ if there exists a function $f$ such that 

$$ f'(x)=\lim_{h \to 0} \frac{f(x+h)-f(x)}{h}$$ 

for every input $x\in D$ where $D=\lbrace x\in \mathbb R : f'(x) \text{ exists}\rbrace$. <br>
<br>

**Example 2.1.7.** Let $f:\mathbb R \to \mathbb R$ be a function such that $f(x)=x^3-x$. Find the derivative of $f$.<br>
**Solution.** By the Definition 2.1.6, 

$$f'(x)=\lim_{h \to 0} \frac{f(x+h)-f(x)}{h}=\lim_{h \to 0}{(3x^2+3hx+h^2-1)}=3x^2-1.$$

Because the limit exists for all $x\in \mathbb R$, $\operatorname{dom}(f')=\mathbb R$.<br>
<br>

