---
layout: post
title: "1. Sets"
date: 2026-06-24 00:00:00 +0900
category_path:
  - Mathematics
  - I. Foundations of Mathematics
  - 1. Naïve Set Theory
created_at: 2026-07-06 17:12:29 +0900
last_modified_at: 2026-07-06 17:12:29 +0900
---

**Definition 1.1.1.** If $a$ is a member of $A,$ we write 

$$a\in A.$$ 

This basic relationship is called *membership relation.* An *empty set* is a set with no members.<br>
<br>

**Principle 1.1.2** (Principle of Extension). Two objects are equal if they have the same members. Since the same objects have the same members, if follows that, for two objects $A$ and $B,$ $A=B$ if and only if, for all members $x,$ we have $(x\in A)\Leftrightarrow (x\in B).$ <br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.1.3.** There is only one empty set.<br><br>
*Proof.* Let $E_1$ and $E_2$ be empty sets. Then there is no element $x$ that makes the truth values of $x\in E_1$ and $x\in E_2$ different from each other. But, according to Principle 1.1.2, two sets can be distinguished only if there exists an element such that $x\in E_1$ and $x\notin E_2$ or vice versa. That is, $E_1=E_2.$<span class="qed">$\square$</span> <br>
<br>

**Notation 1.1.4.** We write $\varnothing$ for the empty set. If $a_1,\dots,a_n$ are finitely many sets, we write $\lbrace a_1,\dots,a_n\rbrace$ for $\lbrace x : x=a_1 \lor \cdots \lor x=a_n\rbrace.$<br>
<br>

**Theorem 1.1.5.** Everything is a set.<br><br>
*Proof.* If $A$ is an object that is not a set, then there is no $x$ such that $x\in A.$ Thus $A$ is equal to the empty set by Principle 1.1.2, contradicting the assumption that it is not a set. Therefore everything is a set.<span class="qed">$\square$</span><br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.6.** $A$ is a *subset* of $B$ if every element of $A$ is an element of $B,$ denoted by $A\subseteq B.$ That is,

$$ A\subseteq B \iff \forall x\ (x\in A \Rightarrow x\in B).$$

Then we see that 

$$ A = B \Leftrightarrow (A\subseteq B \land B\subseteq A). $$

If $A\subseteq B$ and $A\neq B,$ then $A$ is a *proper subset* of $B,$ denoted by $A\subset B.$<br>
<br>

**Definition 1.1.7.** The *power set* of $A$ is the set $\mathcal P(A)$ defined by the equation

$$ \mathcal P(A) = \lbrace X: X\subseteq A\rbrace .$$

<br>

**Definition 1.1.8.** The *union* of $\mathcal A$ is the set $\bigcup \mathcal A$ defined by the equation

$$ \bigcup \mathcal A = \lbrace x : \exists X \in \mathcal A \ (x\in X)\rbrace .$$

Then we write $A\cup B$ for the union of a pair $\lbrace A, B\rbrace.$ That is, 

$$ A\cup B = \bigcup \lbrace A, B\rbrace.$$

<br>

**Definition 1.1.9.** If $\mathcal A$ is a nonempty set, the *intersection* of $\mathcal A$ is the set $\bigcap \mathcal A$ defined by the equation

$$ \bigcap \mathcal A = \lbrace x : \forall X \in \mathcal A \ (x\in X)\rbrace .$$

Then we write $A\cap B$ for the union of a pair $\lbrace A, B\rbrace.$ That is, 

$$ A\cap B = \bigcap \lbrace A, B\rbrace.$$

Two sets $A$ and $B$ are *disjoint* if $A\cap B = \varnothing.$<br>
<br>


## References
1. Cameron, P. J. (1998). *Sets, logic and categories*. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-0589-3
{:reference}
